---
title: Conservatism
author: Tao He
date: 2019-04-27
category: conservatism
layout: post
footnotes:
  - "Mark Levin, <em>Liberty and Tyranny: A Conservative Manifesto</em> (New York: Threshold Editions, 2009), 14."
  - "Peter Linebaugh, <em>The Magna Carta Manifesto: Liberties and Commons for All</em> (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008)."
  - "Jason Hickel, <em>The Divide: Global Inequality from Conquest to Free Markets</em> (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2018), 73-79."
  - "Thomas Jefferson, letter to James Madison, 1785."
  - "Ibid."
  - "Keri Leigh Merrit, <em>Masterless Men: Poor Whites and Slavery in the Antebellum South</em> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017)."
  - "Eric Foner, <em>Reconstruction: America’s Unfinished Revolution, 1863-1877</em> (New York: Harper Collins, 1989), 166-167."
  - "Steven Stoll, <em>Ramp Hollow: The Ordeal of Appalachia</em> (United States: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2017)."
  - "Ibid., 176-211."
  - "Elizabeth Anderson, <em>Private Government: How Employers Rule Our Lives (and Why We Don’t Talk About It)</em> (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 33-36."
  - "Ibid., 32-33."
  - "Thomas Sugrue, <em>The Origins of the Urban Crisis: Race and Inequality in Postwar Detroit</em> (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996), 91-124."
  - "Ibid., 125-130; Jefferson Cowie, <em>Capital Moves: RCA’s Seventy-Year Quest for Cheap Labor</em> (New York: The New Press, 2001), 41-126."
  - "On the drivers of economic inequality in recent decades, see: Dean Baker, <em>The Conservative Nanny State: How the Rich Use the Government to Stay Rich and Get Richer</em> (Washington, DC: Center for Economic and Policy Research, 2006); Dean Baker, <em>Rigged: How Globalization and the Rules of the Modern Economy Were Structured to Make the Rich Richer</em> (Washington, D.C.: Center for Economic and Policy Research, 2016); Adam Cohen, <em>Supreme Inequality: The Supreme Court’s Fifty-Year Battle for a More Unjust America</em> (United States: Penguin Press, 2020); Cowie, <em>Capital Moves</em>; Christopher Faricy, <em>Welfare for the Wealthy: Parties, Social Spending, and Inequality in the United States</em> (Cambridge: Cambridge Universi- ty Press, 2016); Jacob Hacker and Paul Pierson, <em>Winner-Take-All Politics: How Washington Made the Rich Richer—And Turned Its Back on the Middle Class</em> (New York: Simon & Shuster, 2010); Gordon Lafer, <em>The One Percent Solution: How Corporations Are Remaking America One State at a Time</em> (Ithaca: ILR Press, 2017)."
  - "Anu Partanen, <em>The Nordic Theory of Everything: In Search of a Better Life</em> (New York: Harper, 2016), 96-102."
  - "Aviva Chomsky, <em>Undocumented: How Immigration Became Illegal</em> (Boston: Bea- con Press, 2014), 117-151."
  - "Edward Baptist, <em>The Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery and the Making of American Capitalism</em> (New York: Basic Books, 2014)."
  - "John Tirman, <em>The Deaths of Others: The Fate of Civilians in America’s Wars</em> (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 92, 168."
  - "Vincent Bevins, <em>The Jakarta Method: Washington’s Anticommunist Crusade & The Mass Murder Program That Shaped Our Wold</em> (New York: Hatchette Book Group, Inc., 2020)."
  - "Hickel, <em>The Divide</em>, 113, 197."
  - "Charles Sellers, <em>The Market Revolution: Jacksonian America, 1815-1846</em> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991), 1-201."
  - "Norman Ware, <em>The Industrial Worker, 1840-1860: The Reaction of American Industrial Society to the Advance of the Industrial Revolution</em> (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1924), 6-9, 26-100."
  - "Sellers, <em>The Market Revolution</em>, 341."
  - "Anderson, <em>Private Government</em>, 33-36."
  - "William Blizzard, <em>When Miners March</em> (Oakland: PM Press, 2010), 341."
  - "Michael Yates, <em>Why Unions Matter</em> (New York: Monthly Review Press, 2009), 50, 188-189."
  - "Karl Polanyi, <em>The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time</em> (Boston: Beacon Press, 2001)."
  - "See note 15 from “<a href='/conservatism.html#fn15'>Conservatism</a>”"
  - "Noam Chomsky and Robert Polin, <em>Climate Crisis and the Global Green New Deal: The Political Economy of Saving the Planet</em> (New York: Verso, 2020)."
  - "Katharina Pistor, <em>The Code of Capital: How the Law Creates Wealth and Inequality</em> (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2019), 34."
  - "Morton Horwitz, <em>The Transformation of American Law, 1780-1860</em> (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1977), 40-41."
  - "Ibid., 46-47."
  - "Horwitz, <em>The Transformation of American Law</em>."
  - "Thomas Jefferson, letter to James Madison, 1785."
  - "Benjamin Franklin, letter to Robert Morris, 1783."
  - "Thomas Paine, <em>Agrarian Justice</em>, 1797."
  - "David Korten, <em>When Corporations Rule the World</em> (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2001), 63."
  - "Karen Orren, <em>Belated Feudalism: Labor, the Law, and Liberal Development in the United States</em> (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 89-91."
  - "Ibid., 93."
  - "Ibid., 122, 129, 133; Ted Nace, <em>Gangs of America: The Rise of Corporate Power and the Disabling of Democracy</em> (San Francisco: Berret-Koehler Publishers, Inc., 2005), 125."
  - "Anderson, <em>Private Government</em>, 33-36."
  - "Christopher Tiedeman, <em>A Treatise on State and Federal Control of Persons and Property in the United States Considered from Both a Civil and Criminal Standpoint</em> (Union: The Lawbook Exchange, 2002), 383, 609-610."
  - "Naomi Lamoreaux and William Novak, eds., <em>Corporations and American Democracy</em> (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2017), 114, Kindle."
  - "Robert Post, <em>Citizens Divided: Campaign Finance Reform and the Constitution</em> (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2014), 29."
  - "Nace, <em>Gangs of America</em>, 244-248."
  - "Ibid., 127-129."
  - "Lamoreaux and Novak, <em>Corporations and American Democracy</em>, 115."
  - "Adam Cohen. <em>Supreme Inequality: The Supreme Court’s Fifty-Year Battle for a More Unjust America</em> (United States: Penguin Press, 2020), 314-315."
  - "Ibid., 1-40."
  - "Cohen, <em>Supreme Inequality</em>."
  - "Mark Levin, “The Modern Democrats’ Rejection Of Private Property Rights,” <a href='https://YouTube.com'>YouTube</a>. August 1, 2012, 9:01, <a href='https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aC-qRkQzYkiU'>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aC-qRkQzYkiU</a>."
  - "Matt Bruenig, “Top 1% Up $21 Trillion. Bottom 50% Down $900 Billion.” <a href='PeoplesPolicyProject.org'>People’s Policy Project</a>. Jun. 14, 2019, <a href='https://www.peoplespolicyproject.org/2019/06/14/top-1-up-21-trillion-bottom-50-down-900-billion/''>https://www.peoplespolicyproject.org/2019/06/14/top-1-up-21-trillion-bottom-50-down-900-billion/</a>."
  - "See note 15 from “<a href='/conservatism.html#fn15'>Conservatism</a>”"
  - "Mark Levin, <em>Ameritopia: The Unmaking of America</em> (New York: Threshold Editions, 2012), 9."
  - "Thomas Piketty, <em>Capital in the Twenty-First Century</em> (Cambridge: The Bellknap Press, 2014), 512."
  - "Rob Larson, <em>Bit Tyrants: The Political Economy of Silicon Valley</em> (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2020), 29-35."
  - "Robert Jackall, <em>Moral Mazes: The World of Corporate Managers</em> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 18-94."
  - "Lane Kenworthy, <em>Social Democratic America</em> (New York: Oxford University Press, 2014), 33-34."
---

For decades the American Right has branded its political movement as “conservative.” They believe society should adhere to conservative principles when bringing about social change. Among these principles are a respect for traditional rights, opposition to radical social transformation, opposition to “constitutional innovation,” a desire to protect property rights, and a belief that social inequality is a natural and permanent feature of any stable society. Adhering to these principles, conservatives claim, will protect society by preventing social change from moving too quickly. When society changes too quickly, we risk social instability, which will inevitably lead to despotism and tyranny. History offers many such lessons, like the Reign of Terror that took place in the wake of the French Revolution and the totalitarian political and economic systems that grew out of the Russian and Chinese revolutions.

Adhering to conservative principles, we’re told, requires opposing government welfare programs, high taxes, and “judicial activism.” Allowing the state to tax us more in order to pay for government welfare programs violates “property rights,” which form the basis of any stable society. When the government starts to take away private property, there’s no telling where it will end. We could eventually be left with anarchy. Conservatives also claim that welfare programs are only possible because “activist judges” invent new law in order to legalize them. Appointing judges who rule in this manner is therefore asking for problems.

Furthermore, according to conservatives, taxing Americans too much disincentivizes individuals to work hard. This erodes the social hierarchies needed for a prosperous society. If individuals have no incentive to make use of their talents, the cream can’t rise to the top, there will be less innovation, and we’ll all be worse off. Instead, conservatives say we should reduce spending on social programs, cut taxes, and favor judicial restraint, allowing social progress to develop organically through voluntary interaction in the free market and reward those who put their talents to good use.

In practice, tax cuts and less social spending have little to do with conservative principles. These policies fuel an economic system that has always destroyed traditional rights, as well as radically transformed society for millions—and not in a good way. As we’ll see, a number of prominent conservatives who witnessed these social transformations unfold over a century ago understood this perfectly and made their concerns known. Today, however, “conservatives” favor a brand of unfettered capitalism that continues to wreak havoc on society.

We’ll also see that capitalism couldn’t have destroyed traditional rights or radically transformed society without the help of activist judges. These judges invented new law on behalf of capitalists in the name of “progress,” which they equated with economic development, while limiting the power of workers and insulating capitalists from democratic accountability, allowing elites to appropriate the bulk of society’s wealth. Conservatives’ defense of “property rights” should be understood in this context. Elites constantly rig our economic and political system to distribute society’s wealth to themselves—primarily with the aid of the courts—and have done so for hundreds of years. Conservatives want us to ignore this history, so they can trick the rest of society into letting economic elites keep the property they steal from the rest of society.

The same is true of conservatives’ defense of social hierarchies that arise from capitalism. Conservatives claim that those who rise through the ranks of society do so on the basis of “merit.” They achieve success by “working hard” and taking advantage of the opportunities life provides them. This claim is especially powerful and widely accepted—including among liberals, who are some of its most ardent defenders. But as we’ll see, the social hierarchies that arise from capitalism are largely arbitrary. They have more to do with how we structure our political and economic institutions.

Traditional Rights
-------------

Conservatives claim to value “traditional rights.” Conservative commentator Mark Levin, for example, uses the idea of traditional rights to differentiate conservatism from the Left. Levin claims that the Left justifies its policies as conferring “new, abstract rights”—for example, the right to healthcare or the right to a job—but that these rights are “nothing more than a Statist deception intended to empower the state and deny man his real rights—those that are both inalienable and anchored in custom, tradition, and faith.”{% include footnote.html %} But Levin has it backwards. Access to healthcare and jobs protects traditional rights, whereas the Right aims to deny man his rights, and uses the state to this end. In order to understand why, it’s helpful to look at how elites have deprived ordinary people of resources throughout history.

Traditional rights are hardly new or abstract. While “jobs” haven’t always been thought of as a right, and healthcare as we know it today obviously hasn’t always existed, the right to access enough of society’s resources to live, given the resources available, has long been recognized. In pre-capitalist societies, peasants had the right to the commons—land upon which they could hunt and gather food to feed their families, collect wood to build and heat their homes, and graze livestock to produce additional food and clothing. These rights were outlined in the Charter of the Forest, a companion document to Magna Carta, and enforced for hundreds of years. In an otherwise brutal world, the right to the commons allowed ordinary people some degree of independence from the hands of their rulers. Peasants had to give the lord a share of what they produced, but they were able to work under their own direction to produce for their own needs, without an overseer’s constant supervision.{% include footnote.html %}

Eventually, a new aristocracy had other ideas about the commons and used “property rights” to swallow up much of the peasantry’s sliver of independence. As capitalism replaced feudalism in parts of Europe, elites _privatized_ the commons. They converted the commons into large-scale farms to produce crops and raw materials for commercial gain, and prohibited peasants from accessing the commons under penalty of death. Because a small minority of aristocrats exercised absolute ownership rights over the bulk of society’s wealth, ordinary people were dispossessed of the means to live and forced into a permanent state of dependence.{% include footnote.html %}

Thomas Jefferson was among those acknowledging the injustice wrought by this form of dispossession. Writing of one of his visits to France in the years preceding the French Revolution, Jefferson observed, “Whenever there is in any country, uncultivated lands and unemployed poor, it is clear that the laws of property have been so far extended as to violate natural right. The earth is given as a common stock for man to labour and live on.”{% include footnote.html %}

Note Jefferson’s reference to the “laws of property.” While conservatives claim that the Left uses the State to violate individual rights (by redistributing property), this is in fact how the Right denies people their rights. Elites rely on the government to help distribute property, namely by creating markets for resources like land, labor, and money. Once land becomes scarce, for example, individuals are effectively forced to exchange their labor for money in order to survive (or to pay taxes). Because elites enjoy far more bargaining power when individuals exchange these “fictitious commodities,” elites can use their power to exploit those with less, thereby violating their rights. The power of elites to do this is underwritten by the State, which backs their claims to property, and therefore enforces the unequal distribution of property that creates conditions for exploitation.

Jefferson went on to compare the conditions in France to those in the United States at the time, observing, “It is too soon yet in our country to say that every man who cannot find employment but who can find uncultivated land, shall be at liberty to cultivate it, paying a moderate rent. But it is not too soon to provide by every possible means that as few as possible shall be without a little portion of land. The small landholders are the most precious part of a state.”{% include footnote.html %} In other words when Jefferson commented on the conditions in France, American elites had yet to achieve the same level of power as their French counterparts, because they had yet to appropriate as much of society’s wealth (in this case, land). The conditions Jefferson described, however, would over time give way to dispossession.

Elites dispossessed the rest of society in a variety of ways. Wealthy planters in the South, for example, bought up the best land in order to produce cotton. This forced smaller farmers to live on the worst land, creating widespread poverty.{% include footnote.html %} This situation was even worse for blacks, who found themselves literally defined as the property of whites. But even after slavery was abolished, southern whites maintained ownership of the land and enforced Black Codes, which forced blacks into exploitative labor contracts that mirrored slavery.{% include footnote.html %} In Appalachia, coal and timber companies bought up enormous tracts of land, which they often procured using political connections, and turned homesteaders into wage laborers, while wealth flowed out of the communities where it was produced and into the pockets of absentee owners.{% include footnote.html %} In the Midwest, elites used debt to dispossess farmers, who were often wiped out by crop failures, natural disasters, and competition with larger enterprises as markets enveloped American society.{% include footnote.html %} In America’s industrial centers, economies of scale limited opportunities for self-employment,{% include footnote.html %} while waves of immigration expanded the labor supply, forcing workers into fiercer competition with each other.{% include footnote.html %} This allowed factory owners to appropriate a larger share of what workers produced, leaving workers with less income. Blacks of course continued to face discrimination, were relegated to the worst jobs, and were paid less than their white counterparts.{% include footnote.html %} When workers attempted to unionize in order to gain higher pay and better working conditions, capitalists began to de-industrialize, and started outsourcing their jobs to the South, where laws were more favorable to employers, or to developing countries.{% include footnote.html %}

The legacy of these forms of dispossession remains with us today. When a child is born into a segregated inner-city or suburb, or a holler in West Virginia, and as a result must grow up surrounded by poverty, violence, drugs, and crime, or without access to quality education, housing, and healthcare, and therefore lacks sufficient opportunity to realize their human potential or live the good life, it’s because elites throughout history structured America’s political and economic system to deprive others of adequate resources, and continue to do so.

Over the last five decades, elites have employed a number of new tactics to continue to dispossess workers and their families. They’ve weakened unions, let the minimum wage erode, used monetary policy to generate unemployment, slashed public jobs, and cut welfare programs, while continuing to offshore jobs to developing countries. These policies relegate millions to undesirable jobs with little prospect of long term economic security or income mobility. Most workers no longer have the power to bargain for a larger slice of America’s economic pie in order to support their families, and are left to endure workplace indignities—like harassment from bosses, lack of control over their work, and being cut out of key decisions that affect their job. Elites have also used the wealth they accumulate on the backs of workers to corrupt our political system and help elect politicians that cut their taxes, shower them with subsidies, de-regulate industry, and curb voting rights in order to help them gain an electoral advantage.{% include footnote.html %}

Women face additional obstacles. They didn’t have the right to vote until 1920 and were largely excluded from the formal labor force until World War II. Indeed, employment levels for women didn’t reach parity with men until the 1990s. To this day, women must bear the brunt of responsibility for household production (cooking, cleaning, laundry, etc.), as well as child-rearing, which often sets their careers on different trajectories than their male counterparts and leaves them with less income.{% include footnote.html %}

Undocumented immigrants face even harder challenges. Many come from countries colonized by European powers that prevented economic development, enclosed commons, poisoned the environment, and undercut farmers’ livelihoods by flooding local markets with cheap produce. Under the rule of western-backed, authoritarian regimes, peasants had their liberties repressed and were deprived of democratic political institutions that might have allowed them to structure their economies in a way that benefited ordinary people. When undocumented immigrants from these countries arrive in America, the injustice continues. They lack many of the rights of American citizens, are excluded from access to social programs like Social Security, and have little choice but to find work in dangerous factories, agricultural labor camps, or low-paid service industries. If they raise their voice or try to organize, they can be threatened with deportation.{% include footnote.html %}

If so-called conservatives were serious about defending traditional rights, they would acknowledge the history outlined above and view the wealth that flows to the privileged as an ongoing form of dispossession. We should all view this wealth as the modern equivalent of the “uncultivated lands” to which Thomas Jefferson referred, and therefore distribute this wealth as we see fit instead of allowing the rich to hoard it for themselves or use it as a lever by which to wring ever more wealth from the powerless. We could, for example, use some of these resources to create a robust welfare state, which might provide everyone with enough resources to enjoy a sufficient level of freedom.

Contrary to what conservatives claim, social welfare programs aren’t a “Statist deception” intended to deny man his traditional rights. On the contrary, these programs are the most effective institutions we’ve established to prevent traditional rights from being annihilated. They provide individuals with the resources needed to live free of control by elites who do everything they can to steal society’s wealth. If healthcare isn’t tied to employment, childcare is provided, elderly people are guaranteed income, college is accessible without accruing tens or hundreds of thousands of dollars of debt, and workers can easily join unions, people are less dependent on their employers, and therefore less subject to their employer’s control. Expanding social welfare policies helps to restore the function traditional rights once served—until those rights were continually destroyed by the Right’s brand of “free market” capitalism.

Conservatives don’t care about traditional rights; they’ve worked diligently to eradicate them for decades. What they care about is privileging the rights of the wealthy to enrich themselves, even if it means denying the traditional rights of those who get in their way.

Radical Social Transformation
-------------

Conservatives claim to oppose “radical social transformation.” They argue that tax hikes and redistributive social welfare programs will give too much power to the government, transform society, and pave the way for anarchy, despotism, and tyranny. Instead, they say we should keep taxes low and redistribution to a minimum and allow social change to happen piecemeal through voluntary economic exchange in a capitalist economy. What conservatives ignore, however, is how capitalism was—and continues to be—forced on society through radical, often violent, social transformation.

As capitalism took off in the nineteenth century, new prospects for securing natural resources and new markets to sell goods drove territorial expansion across the North American continent. In the process, American settlers, as well as the US Army, slaughtered thousands of Native Americans. They killed thousands more by spreading disease and herded the rest onto reservations. Similarly, in the decades preceding the Civil War, growing demand for cotton fueled the expansion of slavery, which helped develop America’s capitalist economy.{% include footnote.html %}

This violent history poses a problem for conservatives. Conservatives claim that capitalism requires little more than leaving individuals free to engage in voluntary economic exchange in the “free market.” It’s clear, however, that when conservatives refer to “individuals,” they don’t mean slaves or Native Americans that lived during the period capitalism took root in the US. Conservatives therefore oppose radical social transformation for some people, but not others.

It would be one thing if conservatives acknowledged the role that slavery, theft, and genocide played in establishing their preferred economic system, and took steps to ensure capitalism doesn’t harm vulnerable populations moving forward. Instead, conservatives deny any such role, and promote an agenda that continues to brutalize people all over the world to expand the reach of capital. Whether this means slaughtering millions of peasants in Korea, Vietnam, and Cambodia;{% include footnote.html %} outsourcing murder and torture to authoritarian dictatorships in the name of anticommunism;{% include footnote.html %} or supporting trade policies that allow US corporations to destroy peasant societies—by kicking people off their land, poisoning their environments, or even hiring death squads to murder them—conservatives remain blind to many forms of radical social transformation wrought by their preferred economic policies.{% include footnote.html %} This is enough to reject the idea that conservatives are concerned with the effects of radical social transformation.

But it turns out that conservatives’ opposition to radical social transformation is even more limited. Capitalism also radically transformed society for those who don’t happen to have black or brown skin, or live out of view halfway around the world. For centuries, those who lived in America’s traditional farming communities worked alongside their neighbors in grist mills, blacksmith shops, tanneries, and sawmills to meet their needs. These communities balanced their productive capabilities, and residents exchanged labor with each other depending on where it was most needed. They built each other’s houses and barns, cut logs, harvested wheat, and so on. If one person accrued a debt, this debt wasn’t calculated as money owed, but as labor—to be paid back only when one could do so. Nor did laborers depend on employers for their long-term survival. When relying on labor markets, workers could demand high wages, since labor was relatively scarce. This was a temporary step towards independence, which was all but assured, given that labor markets worked in their favor. The rapid expansion of the market economy throughout the nineteenth century, however, transformed the nature of these social relationships.{% include footnote.html %}

Capitalism replaced traditional social relationships based on kinship, religion, and barter exchange with impersonal, commercial relationships based on property rights and contracts. As capitalism enveloped American society, artisans and farmers who once produced for themselves under their own direction, along with laborers who could once demand high wages, were increasingly forced to work for larger manufacturers under unfavorable terms to earn money. Many moved into company housing and became subject to closer supervision. Workers were forced to increase output to produce greater profits for factory owners while their own wages were continually slashed.{% include footnote.html %} Those who found their lives subject to new forms of control bitterly resented these transformations. As historian Charles Sellers points out, some worried that capital would “swallow up the profits of labor,” that the people would be “pillaged by the greedy cupidity of a privileged class,” and that the “manufacturing monopolies” would “break down the independent mechanic interest,” and “make large masses of people” eke out “a bare subsistence” as “slaves to a few capitalists.”{% include footnote.html %} These transformations would drastically accelerate with the arrival of the Industrial Revolution—business enterprises grew larger, economies of scale further limited opportunities for self-employment, economic power became concentrated in the hands of large employers, and social relations between economic classes became more stratified.{% include footnote.html %}

Nor were these transformations piecemeal or orderly. When workers attempted to resist capitalist social transformation (for example, by forming labor unions), employers mobilized private police forces, as well as the state, to destroy them. Detective agencies like Pinkerton and Baldwin-Felts beat up workers, kicked them out of their houses, spied on them, and even murdered them.{% include footnote.html %} Despite these violent tactics, workers won many victories. The eight-hour work day, the five-day work week, workplace safety regulations, the minimum wage, unemployment insurance, Social Security, and collective bargaining rights can all be credited to the struggles won by workers who fought back against capitalist social transformation.{% include footnote.html %} These programs, however, weren’t an attempt to radically transform society, but a reaction to the rise of corporate power in the wake of the Industrial Revolution and later the Great Depression.{% include footnote.html %}

The struggle continues today against five decades of economic reforms that have eroded the power of the middle class and ensure persistently high levels of poverty. De-industrialization, industrial automation, declining union membership, higher levels of unemployment, slashes to social spending, trade agreements, lax antitrust law, lower taxes for the wealthy, the erosion of the minimum wage, slashes to public education, right-to-work laws, de-regulation—the list goes on. These policies have destroyed countless communities that once relied on good manufacturing jobs, as well as the economic ladder by which those at the bottom of America’s economic hierarchy once lifted themselves into the middle class.{% include footnote.html %} Indeed, it’s difficult to see how modern reforms proposed by the Left are more radical. Bumping the minimum wage to $15 or $20 per hour, or doing what every other rich country has already done—for example, providing health insurance to its citizens—wouldn’t radically transform society. On the contrary, it’s conservatives who wish to radically transform society—back to the way it was before the New Deal, when corporations had even less accountability, economic inequality was at its peak, and the economy was plagued by financial instability.

In many ways, capitalist transformation would go much further—by ensuring the worst outcomes scientists predict will arise from climate change, which threaten to kill millions of people around the world and fundamentally transform human civilization. It follows that policies such as a Green New Deal wouldn’t so much transform society as provide the bare minimum needed to prevent enormous losses of human life, as well prevent as social collapse.{% include footnote.html %} So-called conservatives don’t have a problem with radical social transformation. They only have a problem with transformations that might alter the balance of power in society between the rich and everyone else, even if it means destroying the entire planet.

Judicial Activism
-------------

Conservatives claim to oppose “judicial activism.” When liberal judges uphold “unconstitutional” laws, such as those establishing social welfare programs like Obamacare, conservatives claim this erodes the “rule of law,” gives too much power to the government, and thereby opens the door for tyranny. Conservatives, however, ignore the role judicial activism has played in establishing the Right’s brand of “free market” capitalism. Since the early nineteenth century, judicial activism has continually structured “free markets” in a way that distributes society’s wealth to its most privileged members, and shields this wealth from being redistributed.

An early example of judicial activism took place in 1823 when the Supreme Court ruled in _Johnson v. M’Intosh_ that white people had priority rights to newly “discovered” land, superseding claims by mere “occupants” of the land. This allowed Congress to pass the Indian Removal Act of 1830, which gave the government legal sanction to slaughter thousands of Native Americans, steal their land, and herd the rest onto reservations.{% include footnote.html %} Judicial activism therefore created the legal basis for theft on behalf of white people, and along with it the system of property rights that would extend across the nation.

The courts would not only help distribute society’s wealth to white people, but they would do so disproportionately to new commercial enterprises. They did this by reinterpreting the nature of property rights and contracts. Let’s say, for example, that you lived near a waterway during the early nineteenth century. A mill owner then builds a dam downstream from you, flooding your property. It used to be that you could sue the mill owner for violating your property rights. The courts, however, started changing the law in favor of new mill owners, based on the idea that economic development benefited the public. Similarly, in _Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge_ (1837), the US Supreme Court held that incumbent investors might no longer be entitled to the monopoly privileges implied in a corporation’s charter.{% include footnote.html %} In this case, investors who had a stake in an existing bridge claimed the government broke its contract when constructing a new bridge. The Court held, however, that if such privileges would hold back economic development (which in this case resulted from new competition), old legal interpretations were to be cast aside.{% include footnote.html %} According to legal scholar Morton Horwitz, these types of innovations arose because judges came to see themselves not as neutral arbiters applying traditional interpretations of the law, but as agents for social progress, which they equated with economic development.{% include footnote.html %}

In order to get a better idea as to why these rulings constituted a form of judicial activism, it’s important to point out that when judges began to make rulings like these, the nature of institutions such as property rights weren’t always clear. While nearly everyone agreed that the government should protect “property rights,” what constituted property rights in the first place was far from settled. Should we respect the claims of Native Americans to their land? Should we confiscate property held by British Loyalists after the Revolutionary War? Should states be allowed to enact debtor relief laws and issue paper currency? Should the government honor the full value of bonds bought on speculation? And so on.

Several of the Founders took a relatively left-wing view on some of these matters. Thomas Jefferson thought that if the distribution of property in society were to become highly skewed, this would violate the “natural rights” of those without property, and might call for the “laws of property” to be changed.{% include footnote.html %} Benjamin Franklin believed individuals were only entitled to own property sufficient to “conserve the individual,” and that society may “dispose of the rest as it wished.”{% include footnote.html %} Thomas Paine wrote that society must be organized “like a system of pulleys” in order to relieve human misery, and to this end advocated state-funded old age pensions and lump sum payments to all citizens upon reaching adulthood, to be administered by the state and funded by an estate tax.{% include footnote.html %}

The courts, however, would create their own system of pulleys. Rather than interpret the law to relieve human misery, they did so in a way that privileged the power of capital. In _Dartmouth v. Woodward_ (1819), the Court ruled that state-granted charters were a type of “contract,” and were therefore protected by the Constitution. As a result, corporations would be free from state regulation beyond what was stipulated in their charters. This was significant because corporate charters had traditionally been understood as artificial creations of the state, and were subject to regulation or amendment by the state that issued them. And for good reason. It was well understood that corporations were often established to enrich the well-connected, and if allowed, would act counter to the public interest. This is why charters often limited corporations to specific functions, were set to expire after a specified length of time, and capped the amount of profit corporations could make.{% include footnote.html %}

This isn’t to say the _Dartmouth_ ruling automatically freed corporations from regulation. States did, after all, include regulatory provisions in corporate charters. But as we’ll see, _Dartmouth_ foreshadowed a number of judicial rulings that would allow corporate power to grow unchecked. Nor is this to say that judicial activism meant to promote economic development was all bad. It’s true that the public often benefited from competition when markets worked the way their proponents claim. But markets often _didn’t_ work this way, and economic progress was narrowly defined in terms of how much wealth commercial enterprise produced. Questions regarding the distribution of this wealth—between capitalists and workers, for example—would be left to the market, where capitalists enjoyed a great deal of power, and workers—along with the broader public—would find themselves with hardly any. Given this reality, judicial activism would come to arbitrarily favor capitalists.

The arbitrary nature of judicial activism is evident by the way the courts interpreted the relationship between employers and employees. While the courts innovated new commercial law in order to foster “progress,” when it came to labor practices, courts often based their rulings on feudal precedents. If an individual agreed to work for an employer for a certain length of time, for example, they would only be entitled to compensation if they completed the entire duration specified at the outset of the labor agreement. If the employee became injured, or wished to walk away from the job before the end of the contract, rather than being entitled to compensation for the work performed to that point, the courts held that the employee would be entitled to nothing. But when it came to businesses contracting with each other, the courts interpreted the law much differently. If a builder had performed work for another business, but couldn’t complete the job to the specifications outlined in the work contract, the builder would still be entitled to compensation.{% include footnote.html %}

Judicial activism afforded employers a great deal of power over their employees. Employers could cheat workers out of their pay by waiting until the end of the employment period, then claim the employee had failed to perform some part of his duties, and use this claim as a basis to terminate the contract. This isn’t to say employers always used this tactic, but the threat that they could do so served as a deterrent to employees from ending a contract with an employer, and impeded labor mobility.{% include footnote.html %} When workers tried to push back against these forms of control—by organizing labor unions or participating in strikes—judges often intervened on behalf of employers, issuing labor injunctions to put a stop to these strikes.{% include footnote.html %}

Judges who innovated in this way tried to have it both ways. In the pre-capitalist apprentice systems found in Europe, masters were obligated to provide their apprentices with housing, food, clothing, tools, and so on. They were liable for their apprentices’ mistakes and were expected to honor these duties for years, at which point the apprentice would become a master himself. Once the apprentice became a master, he joined a guild, which offered him economic security. This type of relationship became anachronistic in America during its colonial period and the first decades after US independence, as laborers had access to cheap land (at least if they were white), which enabled them to produce for their own needs or demand high wages. While many immigrants came to America as indentured servants, for the most part laborers were unencumbered by the types of social relationships found in feudal guild systems. As America’s economy developed, however, labor markets came to favor employers at the expense of laborers. Land became more scarce. High birth rates, along with waves of immigration, dramatically expanded the labor pool. Workers were forced into labor markets, where they increasingly had less power, and as a result became subject to economic exploitation at the hands of large, authoritarian institutions, otherwise known as corporations. Rather than take these factors into account and update the law in order to secure workers a sufficient level of freedom, judges continued to idealize labor contracts as voluntary associations between free individuals—with each party owing the other little beyond what they contractually agreed upon. These rulings served to reinforce extreme levels of inequality that arose from America’s rapidly developing economy.{% include footnote.html %}

These developments led to warnings from a number of dissenting voices—even among conservative legal authorities. Legal scholar Christopher Tiedeman warned that if corporate power were left unchecked, this would “be a menace to the liberty of the individual, and to the stability of the American States as popular governments,” that the establishment of corporate charters served to “intensify the natural power which the capitalist in his individual capacity possesses over the noncapitalist,” and therefore advocated “as a return to a uniform recognition of the constitutional guarantee of equality before the law, the repeal of the statutes which provide for the creation of private corporations.”{% include footnote.html %} Chief Justice of the Michigan Supreme Court Thomas Cooley claimed that “the most enormous and threatening powers in our country have been created; some of the great and wealthy corporations have greater influence in the country at large and upon the legislation of the country than the States to which they owe their corporate existence.”{% include footnote.html %} Likewise, Elihu Root, Theodore Roosevelt’s eventual Secretary of State, described corporate campaign contributions as “the constantly growing evil in our political affairs, which has, in my judgment, done more to shake the confidence of the plain people of small means in our political institutions, than any other practice which has ever obtained since the foundation of our government.”{% include footnote.html %}

Instead of using the law to limit the power of corporations, the courts would continue to do everything possible to insulate corporations from democratic politics. State courts invalidated laws that limited work hours. The Supreme Court ruled that corporations could seek federal enforcement of agreements made when operating outside of the state in which they were chartered, that corporations would enjoy the protection of federal judicial review of state legislatures, that corporations could often ignore the decisions of state regulatory commissions, that states couldn’t pass laws banning “yellow dog” contracts, that it was legal to jail anyone who joined radical organizations like the IWW, and that the so-called rights of shareholders must be respected above the interests of workers, as well as those who lived in the communities in which corporations operated.{% include footnote.html %}

Some of these legal innovations were truly astonishing. After the states ratified the 14th Amendment, which aimed to protect the rights of former slaves, the Court all but ignored the rights of black people and instead used the Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause to shield shareholders from legislation that might diminish the value of their holdings without due process.{% include footnote.html %} The Court also protected corporations from the Sherman Anti-Trust Act, maintaining that combinations of capital were legal unless they were “unreasonable,” providing judges with wiggle room when applying the law to regulate commercial enterprises, while using the Act to crush labor unions, which the courts characterized as “combinations” of labor analogous to corporate monopolies.{% include footnote.html %}

The distributive effects of these judicial decisions can’t be understated. Because capital was encouraged to combine indefinitely—while workers were limited in the extent to which they could organize—workers found themselves without the power to bargain for higher wages and better working conditions. As a result, they were left with a smaller share of the economic gains derived from what they produced. Judicial activism thereby helped funnel wealth into the pockets of capitalists and out of the pockets of ordinary Americans, helping to fuel extreme levels of economic inequality.

Judicial activism hasn’t all been in one direction. During the Great Depression, President Roosevelt threatened to pack the Supreme Court with judges who were sympathetic to his economic agenda, forcing the Court to change its interpretation on the constitutionality of several laws, thereby granting more power to workers and allowing the government to regulate work hours and wages on workers’ behalf, and eventually regulate workplace safety, as well as pass environmental regulations.{% include footnote.html %} The Warren Court put a formal end to segregation in public schools, expanding educational opportunities for black people in the 1950s, and signaled it would do the same for the poor more generally.{% include footnote.html %}

Since the 1970s, however, the Court has lurched back to the right. Richard Nixon packed the Court, flipping the Court’s ideological balance, after which the Court halted school integration, denied equal state funding for schools, defined money as a form of speech, intervened in the 2000 presidential election to install Republican candidate George W. Bush as President (and thereby ensured the Court would remain conservative), allowed corporations to spend unlimited resources on elections, overturned Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act, and so on. These rulings have helped conservatives maintain an outsized influence on American politics, which they’ve used to continue funneling more of society’s wealth to themselves, further amplifying the feedback loop between economic and political power that plagues American society.{% include footnote.html %}

If conservatives really opposed judicial activism, they would acknowledge this history, admit that judicial activism has always been intrinsic to the nature of the judicial branch, and that any judicial decision along the lines outlined here always has distributional effects when it comes to income and wealth. Instead, so-called conservatives pretend their interpretations of the law are neutral, and ignore judicial activism when it’s used to rig the economic and political system in favor of power and privilege. Conservatives don’t have a problem with judicial activism, only activism that threatens the material interests of corporations and the rich.


Property Rights
-------------

When conservatives oppose what they consider high levels of taxation, they often do so on the basis of defending “property rights.” Commentator Mark Levin, when responding to the prospect of a tax hike supported by then-president Barack Obama, worried that Obama was “completely rejecting the notion of private property rights.”{% include footnote.html %} The way conservatives use the term “property rights,” however, is misleading. When we pass a law to raise taxes, it doesn’t allow me to squat in your house, sleep in your bed, or drive your car around town without your permission when you’re not using it. Taxation might bring about a different _distribution_ of property, but we still have laws that protect everyone’s property once we decide how it should be distributed.

Conservatives’ conception of property rights differs from how the rest of the world defines property rights, which are merely legal institutions that societies establish through their governments to enforce property ownership. Conservatives instead conflate their ideas about _who should own what property_ with property rights itself. They think property acquisition arising within the market is just; therefore those who engage in market exchange have a “right” to whatever property they can acquire in this way. In other words, they should be morally entitled to keep this property.

The problem with this conception of property rights is that those who acquire property in the so-called free market often _shouldn’t_ be entitled to keep this property. One reason for this is that market exchange often isn’t just. This happens when one party to an economic exchange enjoys a great deal more power than another party, and uses this imbalance of power to take advantage of the weaker party. Let’s say you’re a worker who needs to feed your family or pay next month’s rent. You take a job working at Walmart because you have few other options. If you want to bargain for higher wages and benefits, or better working conditions, good luck. You’re bargaining on their terms. They don’t need you as much as you need them. As a result, you make less and they make more—and it doesn’t matter if you think you’re getting screwed. Indeed, those who view such an exchange as unjust can raise the same objections conservatives do about taxation. If “property rights” just means “whatever property we think we’re entitled to,” then market exchange that results in a distribution of property we think is unjust violates the “property rights” of those who get taken advantage of.

One might be tempted to think that distributing property through markets is fundamentally different than distributing property via the tax system, because taxation involves coercion at the hands of the government whereas market exchange doesn’t. But this isn’t true. When individuals engage in market exchange, they always do so within a set of state-enforced legal constraints that lurk in the background. These constraints are what underpin the bargaining power of those who engage in market exchange, and allow those in a stronger position to take advantage of the weaker.

For example, corporations are the primary institutions by which society produces goods and distributes wealth derived from the production of these goods. These institutions are created by law. They’re chartered by governments. Their internal structure is sanctioned by governments. Their ability to own property and make contracts is created and enforced by governments. And they’re set up to concentrate economic power in the hands of a relatively small number of shareholders and managers, who use this power to exploit workers and appropriate the wealth society creates. In other words, the reason we have to use the government to “redistribute” property is because we have laws that distribute wealth to the rich before taxes even come into play. Corporate law, property law, contract law, and so on _distribute_ property, just like tax law.

But those laws aren’t the only government policies that distribute wealth. Consider what’s happened over the past several decades. Nearly all of the income generated from increases in productivity during this period has accrued to the top 10 percent of earners, and the bulk of this increase to the top 1 percent. Since 1989, the top 1 percent has seen its net worth grow by $21 trillion, while the bottom 50 percent has seen its net worth _decrease_ by $900 billion.{% include footnote.html %} It’s not hard to see why. The Federal Reserve used interest rates to tamp down inflation, preventing full employment. We disempowered labor unions. We deregulated the financial industry. We allowed the minimum wage to erode. We entered into trade agreements that allow corporations to offshore jobs. All of these policies distribute income upwards to the most privileged members of society.{% include footnote.html %} Combine them with massive tax cuts for the rich and you have a recipe for unprecedented levels of inequality and wild imbalances of economic and political power between the “haves” and the “have nots.”

There’s a good reason conservatives don’t want you to understand this. The rich have been rigging distributive institutions outside of democratic input for hundreds of years, and they want to keep it that way. Conservatives want us to take all of these policies _except for tax law_ as a given, believe we’re only entitled to what we can acquire in the market, and accept unequal market exchange as natural. However, once we understand how wealth is actually distributed in society, we can see it’s arbitrary to single out taxation as “violating property rights” while ignoring other institutions that distribute wealth. Opposition to taxation isn’t about protecting property rights, but about keeping a particular set of institutions intact—those that allow the rich to maintain their privilege, entrench their power, and more easily accumulate wealth, while limiting what the rest of society can do to change it.

Meritocracy
-------------

The aim of conservatism has always been to justify social hierarchies. These hierarchies are good, according to traditional conservatives, such as Edmund Burke, because they’re natural, or even ordained by God. They hold society together in harmony, provide society with order and stability, and thereby prevent society from devolving into anarchy. Conservatives no longer couch arguments for social hierarchies in these terms, for obvious reasons. Americans have always been suspicious of social hierarchies, whether instituted by the church, the state, or concentrated economic power. Instead, conservatives justify modern social hierarchies on the basis of “merit.” They claim that in a meritocracy, those who work hard ought to be rewarded for their effort. If I study hard to get into college, earn a degree, compete for a good job, work my way up the corporate ladder, or I start and grow my own business, I should reap the rewards. If social and economic hierarchies arise from this process, no problem. According to conservatives, economic inequality is the “engine of liberty,” as it incentivizes individuals to take advantage of their natural talents.{% include footnote.html %}

This is a nice story. It would be great if the world actually worked this way. But in reality, the social and economic hierarchies that arise from our so-called meritocracy are arbitrary. While it’s true that many people work hard to accumulate wealth and social standing, these hierarchies have much more to do with how we structure our political and economic institutions. The steep rise in income inequality over the last five decades didn’t occur because the rich started working harder or became more “meritorious” over this period. It’s because they rigged the political and economic system to distribute more wealth to themselves. CEO salaries rose to astronomical levels, for example, because we slashed top marginal income tax rates.{% include footnote.html %}

Now consider how some of the wealthiest CEOs earn their income in the first place. Bill Gates was successful because he purchased the code for MS-DOS from another programmer, leveraged his social connections to get his operating system on IBM computers, ripped off Apple’s graphical user interface, undercut his competition, and exploited network effects to create a monopoly for Microsoft.{% include footnote.html %} In other words, Gates didn’t acquire his fortune on the basis of merit, but by exploiting a system that rewards ruthless and anticompetitive business tactics, fosters large concentrations of wealth, and allows this wealth to influence the enforcement of antitrust law.

Nor do other high-level managers accumulate wealth on the basis of merit. One’s place within a given corporate-managerial hierarchy often depends on a company’s internal politics, personal ambition, one’s willingness to throw others under the bus, one’s ability to ingratiate themselves with their boss, or just being in the right place at the right time (such as being in charge when the economy is experiencing an economic expansion rather than a contraction).{% include footnote.html %} These factors have little to do with merit, yet managers who succeed due to these factors take home hefty paychecks. This is because society has fostered the growth of large economic units that have the power to hoover up vast sums of wealth and distribute income to those who occupy top positions within these organizations.

Nor are highly-paid professionals who work hard to get through college, pursue graduate degrees, work long hours, and make important contributions to society necessarily compensated on the basis of merit. If someone is able to achieve a high level of professional success in the US, they more than likely had a lot of help along the way. The likelihood of someone attending college, for example, is correlated with parental income.{% include footnote.html %} This should come as no surprise. Parents with higher incomes are able to provide their children with environments conducive to learning, access to better schools, academic guidance, resources such as tutors, and the expectation that they should be entitled to resources that will help them get ahead, like asking teachers for extra help, leeway when turning in school assignments, and help with getting internships. Some parents are able to provide their children with social networks that can help them gain admission to elite universities, get a job interview, or sometimes get hired outright. Those who grow up with these advantages and achieve financial success are then much more likely to marry someone who receives more income. But being born to parents who can provide you with more resources and opportunities, or marrying someone from your own social class and receiving more income as a result, have nothing at all to do with merit.

This doesn’t mean it’s impossible for someone with fewer resources to make it through college or become a highly-paid professional, or that everyone who has achieved professional success in the US was born with a silver spoon in their mouth. Nor does it mean that certain professions shouldn’t demand higher incomes than others, or that there’s anything wrong with marrying someone who receives a higher income. But it does show the arbitrary nature of how resources are distributed in our society, and why we should change our institutions if we wish to provide everyone with sufficient resources to live up to their potential.

The idea that some should receive exorbitant salaries because they “work hard” also has problems. It’s much easier to work hard if one knows they’ll be handsomely compensated, rather than have to toil at a crappy job just to make next month’s rent. It’s also easier to “work hard” if one loves their job. While there’s nothing wrong with this, it doesn’t mean the compensation one receives from working hard is based on merit. And what if you work hard in an industry that’s harmful to society? Should this effort be considered meritorious? What if you work in the “defense” industry, producing technology that causes death and destruction? What if you work at a cigarette company? What if you work in adjacent industries that exist solely to serve these powerful interests? What if your job, for example, is to figure out ways for corporations to dodge their taxes, skirt regulations, buy off politicians, or spread pro-industry propaganda?

This isn’t to say that people who make a lot of money, or who work in industries that harm society, are bad people. Most of them are just trying to provide the best life for their families, which is worthy of esteem. The problem isn’t with individuals who are trying to provide for their families, but with a system that distributes resources in a highly skewed manner, and rewards those who serve the interests of a small minority of corporations and wealthy elites rather than the interests of society. The fact that some are able to get ahead, make the best of their individual situation, and take care of their families shouldn’t provide us with an excuse to ignore injustices that deprive millions of the resources needed to thrive, or preclude us from changing our economic system.
